Adds notes on logging (#151)
kinbiko/mentoring: students/perrymant/22-Logging.md

    - security
- For example, a web server will often log whenever someone accesses a resource (image, file, etc.) on a web page. If the user accessing the page had to authenticate herself, the log message would contain the user’s name. This is an example of a log message: you can use the username to determine who accessed a resource.
- There is unfortunately no standard format for how data is represented in a log message. The exact way a log message is represented depends on how the source of the log message has implemented its log data system.
- A log like `May 21 14:38:25 error` would not be very meaningful, so we should consider improving the quality of the logs that our applications generate, including as much useful information for our logs to help with deriving meaning.
- The typical basic contents for a log message are the following:
    - Timestamp
    - Source
    - Data
- In general, logs should tell you:
    - What happened (with appropriate detail; “Something happened” is not usually particularly useful).
    - When did it happen (and when did it start and end, if relevant).
    - Where did it happen (on what host, what file system, which network interface, etc.).

>     - Who was involved.

Reviewer: Good point. I think perhaps a user ID is even more common -- it's usually less sensitive information, but still uniquely identifies the right entity.

    - Where he, she or it came from (if dealing with OS/Security logs).
- The logging ecosystem (or logging infrastructure), are all the components and piece parts that come together to allow for the generation, filtering, normalization, analysis, and long-term storage of log data.
    Once a device or computer system is configured to generate log messages, the next step is to filter and normalize the messages.
    - `Filtering` deals with including or excluding log messages based on the content in the log message.
    - `Normalization` is the act of taking disparately formatted log messages and converting them to a common format through the use of parsing, which entails scanning the log message from start to finish to pull out information we are interested in and place them into normalized fields.
    - `Log message analysis` deals with collating, correlating and analyzing log data to derive meaning from it.

>     - `long-term data store` is typically accomplished by using a database.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think @javarb is mostly right about this one.
Although! It is pretty common to store your logs in Elasticsearch (a database), and use something called the ELK stack (Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana) to centralise your logs.

There are entire companies built around solving the problem @javarb mentions.

>     - `long-term data store` is typically accomplished by using a database.

Reviewer 2: I see @kinbiko, I think that completes the landscape about how to store logs currently and provides the workaround to the problem, thanks for the information!

- Typical log levels:
    - `INFORMATIONAL`: Messages of this type are designed to let users and administrators know that something benign has occurred.
    - `DEBUG`: Debug messages are generally generated from software systems in order to aid software developers troubleshoot and identify problems with running application code.
    - `WARNING`: Warning messages are concerned with situations where things may be missing or needed for a system, but the absence of which will not impact system operation. For example, if a program isn’t given the proper number of command line arguments, but yet it can run without them, is something the program might log just as a warning to the user or operator.
    - `ERROR`: Error log messages are used to relay errors that occur at various levels in a computer system. Unfortunately, many error messages only give you a starting point as to why they occurred.
    - `ALERT`: An alert is meant to indicate that something interesting has happened.

> - The levels for `java.util.logging` (the underlying loggin framework in Java) in descending order are:

Reviewer: Nobody really uses this framework so feel free to not learn about this.

    - `SEVERE` (highest value): indicating a serious failure
    - `WARNING`: indicating a potential problem
    - `INFO`: a message level for informational messages.
    - `CONFIG`: a message level for static configuration messages, to assist in debugging problems that may be associated with particular configurations.
    - `FINE`, `FINER`, `FINEST`  (lowest value)

>     All of `FINE`, `FINER`, and `FINEST` are intended for relatively detailed tracing.  The exact meaning of the three levels will vary between subsystems, but in general, `FINEST` should be used for the most voluminous detailed output, `FINER` for somewhat less detailed output, and `FINE` for the  lowest volume (and most important) messages.

Reviewer 2: As I said, I think this can be attached to the previous bullet point.

> - In Syslog, the logging framework for OS and Networking, the levels are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In Syslog, the logging framework for OS and Networking, the log levels are:
```

| Emergency     | System is unusable                | A panic condition.                                                                     |
| Alert         | Action must be taken immediately  | A condition that should be corrected immediately, such as a corrupted system database. |
| Critical      | Critical conditions               | Hard device errors.                                                                    |
| Error         | Error conditions                  |                                                                                        |
| Warning       | Warning conditions                |                                                                                        |
| Notice        | Normal but significant conditions | Conditions that are not error conditions, but that may require special handling.       |
| Informational | Informational messages            |                                                                                        |
| Debug         | Debug-level messages              | Messages that contain information normally of use only when debugging a program.       |

> (source [Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syslog))

Reviewer 2: I think you need a space here because is showed on a new row. Or you could put above so:

- In Syslog, the logging framework for OS and Networking, the log levels are (source [wiki](http://...)):

- In Spring Boot Logging Levels are: `OFF`, `ERROR`, `WARN`, `INFO`, `DEBUG`, `TRACE`.

> - By default, Spring Boot configures logging via [Logback](http://logback.qos.ch) to write to the console at an INFO level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- By default, Spring Boot configures logging via [Logback](http://logback.qos.ch) to write to the console at an `INFO` level.
```

### Common log libraries in Java

> - `SLF4J` (Simple Logging Facade for Java, a facade is an object that serves as a front-facing interface masking more complex underlying or structural code. Here's a `HelloWorld` using `SLF4J`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `SLF4J` (Simple Logging Facade for Java). A facade is an object that serves as a front-facing interface masking more complex underlying or structural code. Here's the `HelloWorld` program using `SLF4J`:
```

```java
import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;

public class HelloWorld {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Logger logger = LoggerFactory.getLogger(HelloWorld.class);
    logger.info("Hello World");
  }
}
```

> This would result in the following log message: `0 [main] INFO HelloWorld - Hello World`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once this program is executed, the following log message is shown: `0 [main] INFO HelloWorld - Hello World`
```

> - Here's an example with `log4j`, logging in 3 different log levels:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `Log4j` is another library for logging in Java. Here's a log example setting a log message in three different log levels using `Log4J`:
```

```java
import org.apache.logging.log4j.Logger;
import org.apache.logging.log4j.LogManager;

public class Log4jExample {

    private static Logger logger = LogManager.getLogger(Log4jExample.class);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        logger.debug("Debug log message");
        logger.info("Info log message");
        logger.error("Error log message");
    }
}
```

> This would result in the following log message:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once this program is executed, the following log messages are shown: 
```

```
15:11:22.022 [main] DEBUG Log4jExample - Debug log message
15:11:22.027 [main] INFO Log4jExample - Info log message
15:11:22.027 [main] ERROR Log4jExample - Error log message
```

> For full control over the logging configuration in Intellij, you can create a logback.xml file at the root of the classpath (in src/main/resources). Here’s an example of a simple log-back.xml file you might use (this Logback configuration is more or less equivalent to the default you’ll get if you have no logback.xml file.):

Reviewer: logback.xml or log-back.xml? I'm guessing it's the former.

> For full control over the logging configuration in Intellij, you can create a logback.xml file at the root of the classpath (in src/main/resources). Here’s an example of a simple log-back.xml file you might use (this Logback configuration is more or less equivalent to the default you’ll get if you have no logback.xml file.):

Reviewer: This is unrelated to IntelliJ. It's also not really the root of the class path, so I'd just say `src/main/resources` and don't mention the classpath.
